doc: add peer manager spec (#4609)
celestiaorg/celestia-node: specs/src/shrex/peer_manager.md

# Peer Manager Specification for SHREX Protocol

## Abstract

This specification defines the Peer Manager component for the SHREX protocol in the Celestia network. The Peer Manager is responsible for collecting, organizing, validating, and selecting peers for efficient data retrieval operations based on data availability notifications and peer discovery.

## Table of Contents

- [Terminology](#terminology)
- [Overview](#overview)
- [Core Components](#core-components)
- [Protocol Specification](#protocol-specification)
  - [Peer Pools](#peer-pools)
  - [Parameters](#parameters)
  - [Result Types](#result-types)
- [Manager Operations](#manager-operations)
  - [Peer Selection](#peer-selection)
  - [Pool Management](#pool-management)
  - [Validation](#validation)
  - [Garbage Collection](#garbage-collection)
  - [Blacklisting](#blacklisting)
- [References](#references)
- [Requirements Language](#requirements-language)

## Terminology

- **Peer Manager**: The component responsible for collecting, organizing, and providing peers for data retrieval operations

> - **Peer Pool**: A collection of peer IDs organized by data hash, storing peers known to have specific data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Peer Pool**: A collection of peer IDs organized by data hash, storing peers known to have data associated with the data hash
```

## Abstract

This specification defines the Peer Manager component for the SHREX protocol in the Celestia network. The Peer Manager collects, organizes, and provides peers for efficient data retrieval based on data availability notifications and peer discovery.

## Overview

The Peer Manager serves as the central coordination point for peer selection in the SHREX protocol. It aggregates peers from two primary sources:

1. **ShrEx/Sub notifications**: Peers announcing specific data availability through pubsub
2. **Discovery service**: Peers found through DHT-based discovery

The manager maintains data-hash-specific pools and validates them against headers from header subscription, implementing mechanisms to ensure network quality.

## Core Components

### Header Subscription

The manager MUST subscribe to header updates to validate peer pools:

- Pools MUST be validated by matching received headers against announced data hashes

> - The manager MUST track the initial header height and maintain a threshold for valid pools

Reviewer: and also describe what u mean by threshold for valid pools, being more descriptive here in sentence is helfpul

- If the data hash pool is already validated, the peer MUST be immediately added to discovered nodes pool
- Notifications from blacklisted peers or containing blacklisted hashes MUST be rejected

### Discovery Integration

The manager MUST provide an `UpdateNodePool` interface for the discovery service:

- Discovery MUST add newly found peers via `UpdateNodePool(peerID, isAdded=true)`
- Discovery MUST remove disconnected peers via `UpdateNodePool(peerID, isAdded=false)`
- Blacklisted peers MUST NOT be added to the discovered nodes pool

## Peer Pools

### Data Hash Pools

Peers are organized by the data hashes they announce:

- **Creation**: Pools MUST be created when ShrEx/Sub notifications arrive for a data hash
- **Population**: Peers MUST be added to pools when they announce specific data hashes via ShrEx/Sub
- **Validation**: Pools MUST track validation status until a matching header arrives from header subscription
- **Promotion**: When a pool becomes validated (or is already validated), peers MUST be added to the discovered nodes pool
- **Storage**: Only recent pools MUST be kept (based on configurable depth from latest header)

> - **Cleanup**: Unvalidated pools that timeout MUST have their data hash and peers blacklisted

Reviewer: again: re blacklisting
